It's not like people don't understand
what we're saying. It's just that they
refuse to accept that this could be the
real truth behind the nature of the
disease. People say, "Well, there's a
clear evidence that cancer must be a
genetic disease because people inherit
genes that cause cancer." And the answer
is, yes, on the surface that would
appear to be true. But those genes
encode proteins of the mitochondria and
they and the mitochondria become
defective as the result of those
inherited mutations. 1,600
people will die today
in the United States alone from cancer.
We have an epidemic, an emergency in
this field.
And there's 21,000 people in the world
who die every day from cancer.
Tragedy, for sure.
The good side is there's a treatment
protocol that can radically
address, prevent, and treat most of
these.
Hi, this is Dr. Mercola helping you take
control of your health. And today, I am
joined by Professor Thomas Seyfried from
Boston College, who is a uh one of the
current pioneers in the in in the
application of this therapy, which stems
from Dr. Otto Warburg. Now, most of you
watching this have heard of Warburg
before. He was, as most experts would
not argue with, recognized as one of the
most brilliant biochemists of the 20th
century. Most people know he won a Nobel
Prize in 1931 for the discovery of of
the metabolism of of malignant cells.
But what they don't know that he also
was an MD and a PhD and was personal
friends with Albert Einstein and many of
the the luminary brilliant scientists of
his time. He also didn't just get one
Nobel Prize, he got several. Problem is,
he was a German and chose to stay in
Germany and Hitler did not allow him to
collect his second Nobel Prize in 1941
and he was nominated for a third. So,
brilliant guy, he came up with this
theory and there's he has he's passed
away I believe in the late 70s, maybe
early 70s. And he's had some disciples
since then. His first disciple who took
up this cross and Warburg's first one of
his
burning passions was to find a cure for
cancer. And he did. He really did. But
because he was such an eccentric and he
lived in Germany virtually no one no one
accepted his
positions. Except for Dr. Peter Peterson
out of Johns Hopkins University who took
up the cross in the like the I think the
early 80s and did a lot of novel work
that Dr. Seyfried will discuss. And then
Dr. Seyfried was the next. I view Dr.
Seyfried as a third generation Warburg
disciple who's really done doing some
incredible research to advance this
science and and he started it in the
late 90s early 2000s and he's he's had
some novel contributions which we'll
discuss about that I think are just
really profoundly
illuminatory for helping you understand
what the true cause of cancer is. I mean
what they far exceeded
uh Warburg's initial supposition.
So, with that preface
I would like to warmly welcome you and
thank you for joining us today because
we're we're really anticipating and
eager to engage in this discussion.
Well, thank you very much for for having
me on and
telling you a little bit about some of
the stuff that we've been doing.
Yeah, well you're going to expand on
that because you are clearly the expert.
Uh but yeah, I think maybe if we can
expand on Warburg's work and you know
how you got I think you got interested
in it because of you were studying
seizure disorders as many people do.
Uh which is like sort of the undisputed
uncontroversial application of
nutritional ketosis. Uh I mean it is the
treatment of choice for intractable
seizures.
Uh and then you expand to other So, why
don't you tell us that story? Share what
your current position is at the Boston
College.
Yeah, well, right now I'm a professor of
biology. Um
you know, our our mission here is to
redo research and teach. And you know,
we have a cancer metabolism class that I
teach. I also teach general general
biology to the
to the non-majors because some of these
some of these students of the will will
will be the only opportunity they have
to hear about some of these things. And
and we educate them about uh a lot of
issues on energy metabolism, cancer, and
general biological issues that are going
to help them better negotiate through
their lives and understanding certain
concepts.
So, and we have an active research
program that evaluates not only cancer,
but also some neurodegenerative diseases
like Tay-Sachs disease. We're working
also using ketogenic diets to help
deliver drugs to the brains of of
individuals with neurodegenerative
diseases.
But, um yes, a major focus of course
is is the use of metabolic therapies for
managing cancer.
And this has been a major input uh and
an activity of of ours and it continues.
Okay, great. So, the traditionally held
view
is that cancer is a genetic disease.
But, what Warburg came up with and what
you which you
don't believe and I certainly don't
believe is that there
is a significant amount of emerging
evidence
that shows that cancer is really a
defect in the cell uh cellular energy
metabolism itself. Primarily related to
function of the mitochondria, which
really wasn't known too well in
Warburg's time. I don't even think it
was
uh
officially recognized in the
uh you know,
assessed. And I think it had a name, but
it didn't they didn't discover the
full characteristics of mitochondria
until after Warburg. Well, after his
more passed away, certainly when he was
alive.
So, why don't you expand on that? This
this cuz I think that's the central core
of what we're going to do.
Uh you know, I we I've interviewed you
before
and I recently read Travis
Christofferson's book, The Metabolic
Well, Tripping Over the Truth, Metabolic
Theory of Cancer, which you're
prominently featured in and it for some
reason everything clicked together and
I've just been beyond passionate about
this topic ever since. It's it's really
the full focus of all my
uh time and energy to to really expand
on this, consolidate the information,
and present it in a uh
digestible format where people can
understand. Because this this is the
game changer that not only treats
cancer, but almost every single disease
known to man. Because at the
foundational core is mitochondrial
dysfunction. So, why why don't you you I
I love your work because you're such an
eloquent
uh explainer of this topic. So, what
what I I'd love to to turn over the
platform to you. Well, you you've you've
certainly touched upon a lot of very
important uh points in in in our
understanding of what the nature of of
cancer is. And the first point, of
course,
is you're right. I mean, cancer is
generally considered a genetic disease
um and I refer to this as the dogma of
the field.
Um a dogma is very
an interesting concept um
dogma is is considered an irrefutable
truth.
And um
that cancer is a genetic disease is no
question uh it's a dogma.
The problem with dogma sometimes is it
blinds you to alternative views
and sets up ideologies uh which are
extremely difficult to uh to change.
Um
and you know, the idea, of course, as I
say, when we look at cancer, if you go
to any of the genetics textbooks,
uh biochemistry, cell biology, or
whatever, all the major college
textbooks
talk about cancer as a genetic disease.
Um the NCI website, the first thing they
say, "Cancer is a genetic disease caused
by mutations."
So, the question is is when you have it
coming from the highest levels of our
established
scientific knowledge base, obviously,
how can all these people be wrong? How
how can this be so misunderstood? If If
cancer is a genetic disease,
everything flows from that concept, and
it permeates the pharmaceutical
industries, the academic industry,
the textbook industries, the entire
knowledge base is uh There's very little
discussion of alternative views to the
genetic view.
And um so so a lot of So, the the
argument now is that, "Yes, metabolic
problems occur in cancer cells. No one
denies that. But, these are all due to
the genetic mutations.
So, therefore, we must maintain the the
uh ourselves on the established track
that all of this metabolic stuff could
be could be could be resolved
if we just understood more about the
genetic underpinning of the disease."
Now, that would be well and good if it
were true.
But, the evidence is accumulating that
the mutations that we see that are the
prime focus and the basis for the
genetic theory
are actually epiphenomena. They're
downstream effects of this disturbance
in the metabolism that Warburg
originally defined back in the 1920s and
30s.
Now, this is a very hard pill to swallow
if you have focused your entire career
and an enormous
industries, multiple in overlapping
industries for therapies and whatever on
the idea that that we need to understand
the genes, we need to have precision
medicine that's going to target these
various anomalies.
Um, and then someone comes along and
says that those anomalies are really
happy phenomena. They're not the prime
issue that you should be dealing with.
This is a very difficult concept to
accept or or understand. It's not so
hard to understand it.
It's harder to accept it. The This is
the issue.
Um, it's not like people don't
understand what we're saying. It's just
that they refuse to accept that this
could be the real truth behind the
nature of the disease.
And this then comes into
the idea that that, you know,
okay, so if cancer is a metabolic
disease
and the mitochondria are responsible for
the origin of the disease and and the
defective mitochondria are responsible,
the defective energy metabolism is
responsible for the majority of the
phenotypes that you see,
then how do we deal with the disease
knowing that?
So, you say, well, most of the energy in
our body comes from respiration. We
breathe air, we give off CO2. Oh, before
we Excuse me for interrupting you cuz
cuz you know I know you got a good
track. But but I wanted to take a little
tangent to reinforce the concept you
just stated.
To that cancer is indeed a metabolic
disease despite what almost every single
expert
says otherwise. And I want to refer to
the brilliant work, I believe one of
your most magnificent contributions to
the science, where you compiled research
from some brilliant scientists
who were all independently They're
well-respected scientists within their
within their disciplines who who
conducted
experiments and they had no clue how to
interpret them, but you did. You put it
all together and you know what I'm
talking about with the transportation
component. So, I think that will
absolutely reinforce this concept cuz we
need to establish in people's mind that
yes, indeed, cancer is not a genetic
disease. Well, those experiments that
you mentioned um were always present in
the literature.
Uh the nuclear transfer experiments,
they were considered basically
anomalies. They were not consistent with
the world view that cancer is a nuclear
genetic disease.
And they were more or less um looked at
but not not uh
viewed in light of the origin of the
disease.
So, um and you know, you come across
these occasionally over the spread out
over over several decades um in frogs
and and in in mice and in and in certain
humans and and these kinds of things.
And they all they all came to the same
basic observation, but the observation
was not interpreted in the light of the
origin of cancer.
And that is basically
And what I simply did is is I bundled
all those observations together in a new
light uh looking at the at the
conclusions of those experiments in
light of whether whether the results
would support a gene-based nuclear
gene-based theory versus a mitochondrial
metabolic theory.
And I think that's the contribution.
It's not that um you know, it it was
just it was just interpreting a series
of experiments in light of of the origin
of a disease and then asking
wh- what conclusion uh would these
experiments support? Would it support
the nuclear genetic theory of cancer or
would it support the mitochondrial
metabolic theory of cancer? And in each
of these cases, the the results more
strongly supported the metabolic theory
of cancer than the nuclear genetic
theory. So, what we're doing we're
looking at this in the sense of a
nuclear tran- the nuclear transfer
experiments.
It's the the nuclei of tumor cells
were transplanted
from the tumor
uh uh into a new cytoplasm, a new
cytoplasm that would contain
normal components of that cytoplasm,
which include the mitochondria, the
energy energy generating organelle of
the cell.
Now, if the hypothesis, of course, if
cancer is nuclear gene driven, and the
phenotype of cancer is dysregulated cell
growth,
if the mutations are responsible for the
key phenotype of the disease,
then those genes should be expressed in
the new cytoplasm,
producing a phenotype consistent with
the mutations in those oncogenes or
tumor suppressor genes responsible,
ultimately, for the dysregulated growth.
And what was observed in repeated cases,
over and over again,
is that the tumor the these new cells
containing the tumor nucleus with a new
cytoplasm did not form cancer. They did
not grow un- un- un- un- regulated. They
became part of the society of cells as
the organism developed.
Now, what was interesting
is that many of these nuclear transfer
experiments, the organisms aborted at
certain periods of development. And that
abortion seemed to be related to how
many mutations were in the nucleus that
was transferred.
So, it was true that these cancer nuclei
did contain mutations, but those
mutations were not causing the the the
hallmark feature of the disease, that is
proliferation. Rather, they were for-
they were causing abortion at some
developmental point of the organism that
had those nuclei.
So, so those the mutations, of course,
you can't complete normal development if
you have broken chromosomes, point
mutations, deletions, and all of the
kind of genetic uh uh uh uh
defects that we see in cancer cells.
But, the core the key phenotype of
abnormal proliferation was not seen in
any of those experiments.
Now, on the other hand, when the normal
nucleus was transferred back into a
cancer cytoplasm,
either cell died or it formed tumor
cells. It didn't
And and they that cancer cytoplasm had
defective mitochondria. Yes, that's
right. So, and then further evidence
came even more
uh recently from uh Benny Keripatu and
his colleagues at Baylor, where they
transplanted mitochondria, just the
mitochondria, leaving the nuclei there.
So, the transplantation of normal
mitochondria into a cancer cell
cytoplasm caused the cells to stop
growing abnormally, down regulated the
oncogenes that were supposed to be
driving the tumor.
It made this It made these cells uh uh
uh grow normally. And then if you took
the mitochondria out of the tumor cell
and moved it into a very slow-growing
uh uh type of cancer cell, these cells
now grew like crazy.
So, it was clear that it was from you
put you bundle all these experiments
together,
and you come to the conclusion that the
nuclear mutations cannot be the drivers
of the disease.
If you're a rational human being.
Well, I wrote it in such a way compare
and contrast the two the observations in
light of the two competing major
theories of cancer, the mitochondrial
metabolic theory versus the nuclear gene
theory.
And it should be obvious to most
rational thinkers
that this can these observations are the
strongest data to date to say that
cancer cannot be a nuclear-driven
disease.
Now, the argument, of course, is that
well, we have all these rare inherited
forms of cancer. Like like uh uh
Li-Fraumeni syndrome and BRCA1 and these
kinds of diseases. And therefore, people
say, "Well, there's a clear evidence
that cancer must be a genetic disease
because people inherit genes that cause
cancer." And the answer is, yes, on the
surface that would appear to be true.
But those genes encode proteins of the
mitochondria and the and the
mitochondria become defective as the
result of those inherited mutations. As
Warburg said, "There are many secondary
causes of cancer.
There is only one primary cause, and
that's damage to the respiration." So,
inherited mutations through the germ
line that if that cause cancer through
an effect on the mitochondria, it is the
mitochondria that is the origin of the
disease. It just so happens that that
defect is coming from an inherited gene
rather than from a chemical carcinogen
or radiation or viral infection or an
infection of of of some parasite or
whatever, all of which damage
respiration, all of which can cause
cancer. So, clearly the origin of the
disease is a disturbance of the
respiratory capacity of that cell, which
then if the cell is to survive, it must
upregulate genes necessary for
fermentation, and many of those genes
are the so-called oncogenes. So, the
oncogenes are simply fulfilling a rescue
event of that cell to function in a
fermentation metabolism rather than an
oxidative metabolism. So, we can
downregulate oncogenes simply by moving
the putting in new respiration. So, this
is the origin of the disease.
So, that you thank you for that very
eloquent detailed description uh and you
give a load of information. So, I just
like to extract one kernel and highlight
it because sometimes if you separate it
with silence, people understand rather
than compacting with a lot of other
facts.
The and the the item I want to highlight
is Dr. Warburg said that there are many
secondary causes of disease, but there's
only one primary cause of disease is
disease, defective mitochondrial
respiration.
That's right. That's the key. And then
You got to understand that. You have to
understand that. And
then the traditional scientific
community is not going to agree with
you, but if you just listen again cuz
there's a lot you can put a lot gave us
a lot of information and thankfully it's
being videoed and you can replay it as
many times as you need to understand it,
but that is the most
rational, irrefutable evidence that any
single person can understand. I mean
I've never seen a set of compiled
experimental data to prove it any more
elegant than you did. So, thank you so
much for compiling that.
I mean that's a major service to
humanity. Well, and the and the idea
though but in in light of that, you have
to explain
how the mutations occur.
You see, so this this also has to be
explained and how you can how how the
mutations are not the primary cause, but
the secondary cause. And the answer to
that is once the respiration becomes
damaged, right? This is the and it
doesn't if it if it's damaged too
acutely,
all of the cells die. So, you can never
become a cancer cell from a dead cell.
The cell the cell is chronic the
respiration in the cells are chronically
damaged.
So, the the chronic damage
then leads to a compensatory
fermentation.
Now, the the and that I as I said
requires an up regulation of oncogenes.
But, the the damage to the respiration
also produces reactive oxygen species.
These are radicals that damage DNA,
protein, and uh lipids.
Now, those
ROS, if they are
on the cellular membrane, and which
compose large portions of our biology.
And if our cell membranes aren't
functioning well, we have serious
problems. Yes. So, so um what happens
now is these reactive oxygen species,
they not only damage further the the
respiration,
but they also dam- cause mutations in
the nuclear genome.
So, here come the mutations. The
mutations come as the result of the
defective respiration producing reactive
oxygen species.
So, this is the mechanism showing how
the mutations, the millions of the
hundreds of thousands of mutations that
we see, are coming as the result of the
reactive oxygen species generated from
faulty respiration.
So, the field is focusing uh on the
downstream effects of of the problem.
Okay? And and so, personalized
medicines, checkpoint inhibitors, all of
these kinds of therapies are basically
looking at downstream effects of the
disease. Yes, and if a certain
population of cells have that particular
defect, and you can target that defect,
you may in fact have success in some
individuals that might be have a
considerable number of their tumor cells
having that checkpoint defect.
Yes, so Unfortunately, most of the cells
in the tumor are all different from each
other genetically. So, you're not going
to be able to target all of the all of
the different cells using these kinds of
approaches. Even though you may get
success for a few months or even a year
in some people. Majority of the people
will not respond effectively to these
kinds of therapies for the most part.
Okay, well, thanks. And I wanted
focus on one of the components you said
because you mentioned this element of
reactive oxygen species in the
generation of secondary free radicals.
But one of the targets that you left out
of your list was the actual mitochondria
themselves that where respiration
occurs. Yes.
And I want to let me just word the
question because it's really an
important one. I'll I'll let you expand
on it, but I believe that a large part
of the reason why mitochondria become
dysfunctional
is because we're eating dirty fuel. Now,
what do I mean by that? Glucose burns
dirty. That is what almost everyone is
burning as a primary fuel. Fat, or more
specifically ketones, burn much, much
cleaner. They generate far less reactive
oxygen species. So, if you have less
reactive oxygen species being generated
in the mitochondria, you have less
mitochondrial damage, less signaling
defects occurring, transmitting to the
nuclear DNA, less damage. So, not only
is
refining the fuel that you're feeding
your body the key component of treatment
of cancer, but in my view, it is the
primary way that you prevent cancer.
So, I'll I'll let you let you respond.
Well, well, I I think that's an
important point. Um
you know, one of the things that
triggers
cancer is inflammation. We we have
inflammation.
Uh
Chronic high levels of blood sugar
create inflammation.
Um this you see in a lot of a lot of
situations. Okay, so,
you know, glucose itself is not
carcinogenic.
Uh but glucose elevated uh dysregulated
glucose metabolism
can lead to inflammation
and can lead to um
it it can cause a number of other
disturbances in the in the overall
metabolism of the body.
Now, if you burn if you if you fast, if
you stop eating, your your blood sugar
goes down, your insulin levels go down,
and the body starts to metabolize
fat for energy, but the the the fatty
acids themselves are only one component.
The other the major component, of
course, are the ketone bodies.
Uh it's like putting a a a a a
a board or a a branch a long branch into
a wood chipper.
The fatty acid is the branch that goes
into the chipper and out come these
little ketone bodies. They're water
soluble fat products.
They readily enter cells
and and they're metabolized to
acetyl-CoA through a series of steps.
And and these steps generate NADH, which
is a
reducing equivalent. But they all but
they also um
uh keep the coenzyme Q couple in an
oxidized state. This is very important
because it it's that state it's that
coenzyme Q couple where reactive oxygen
species are in fact generated in the
first place.
So this is a little bit heavy on the
biochemistry. Because uh Richard Veech
at the NIH has done the the the the
majority of work on that on that
pathway. And he was Hans Krebs's last
student, by the way.
And he has elegantly demonstrated how
the ketone bodies Let me just interrupt
there. Krebs, I neglected to mention in
the introduction, was actually a student
of Warburg and actually wrote Warburg's
biography. That's right. That's right.
And the biography was edited by Richard
Veech at the NIH.
But the last Krebs's last student. So so
and Krebs also had a great interest in
ketones. He he did some incredibly
important work uh on the use of the body
by the way the body by the way the body
uses ketones.
So ketones are clean fuel in the sense
in the only in the sense that they they
they they suppress the formation of
reactive oxygen species.
Especially when blood sugar levels are
low.
Okay? Because if you have very high
ketones and high blood sugar, you have
ketoacidosis, which is a
life-threatening event. Yeah, that was
so interesting in insulin deficiency in
type one diabetes. Yes. Not in
nutritional ketosis. No. No, not in
nutritional. Very rare can a normal
person uh with normal physiology get
ketones above uh seven or eight
millimolar. Your ketoacidosis is up
around 20 millimolar. I I you're you're
so far from that from that range. So, um
so, therapeutic ketosis is a very is a
very health
energy or I should say healthy lifestyle
healthy
for maintaining maximum energy
efficiency. And reducing reactive oxygen
radical production. So, the mitochondria
get actually get very healthy
when ketones are metabolized as opposed
to some of the other fuels like glucose
especially glucose.
Yeah, and this is a point I'd like to
emphasize from a different perspective
because traditionally for the last few
decades most natural health enthusiasts
would understand the reactive oxygen
species dilemma and and their attempt to
circumvent this challenge would be to
swallow antioxidants either through
natural foods high in uh
polyphenols or other natural
antioxidants or supplements in an
attempt to reduce them, but I think
that's a flawed strategy. I think it's a
fatally flawed strategy because it's far
more effective to address it at the
source which is changing the fuel. And
it's not that ketones don't generate any
reactive oxygen species cuz another
thing another
uh
piece of information that many people
fail to
appreciate and I think many health
professionals is that reactive oxygen
species are also signaling molecules
very powerful signaling molecules
molecules and if you suppress them
indiscriminately, you are going to have
biological dysfunction. So, you do not
want to eliminate them. You just want to
control them to optimal levels. So, that
they
all the signaling occurs ideally. Yeah,
and that's what happens with ketones. I
mean, you're pretty much in an
the ideal therapeutic window. Yes,
you're right. You're right. There's no
question about that. It's It's what we
call
a a homeostatic state. And ketones allow
the
the they prevent a a a a a um
disregulated reactive oxygen production.
And and and that's basically what it is.
And and aging essentially is
we age because we collect oxygen
radicals in all the tissues of our body.
And uh
and age is basically the second law of
thermodynamics, which is entropy.
Disorder. Uh
we spend the whole our whole life
pushing the boulder up the hill.
Um but eventually the boulder does win.
And
cuz none of us none of us survive
immortal. No, no, that's immortal.
So, I think there's there's another
variable in there with respect to aging
that I think is an important
consideration is that it's not so much
as pushing the boulder up the hill, but
it's ultimately it's a failure of the
repair mechanisms that are there. And
once you damage those repair mechanisms,
specifically mitochondria mitochondria
biogenesis, once that is damaged, then
that that
you're going to get crushed. Yeah, well,
the boulder goes back and
crushed.
Yeah, the boulder rolls back downhill
faster.
Yeah, absolutely. But you're But you're
basically That's all we're doing is is
is um
calorie restricted ketogenic diets,
ketone metabolism, and these kinds of
things delay entropy. Basically, what
you're doing is delaying the second law.
You're you're allowing your body to
remain healthier for a longer period of
time. Um
and that's basically uh
what what we're doing here. Cancer is
accelerated entropy. It's a total
disorganization of the homeostatic uh
uh
the parameters within cells and outside
the cells in the morphogenetic field and
in the entire body itself.
Cancer Cancer patients have all kinds of
of um disturbances in in systemic
homeostasis. It's not just in the cells.
You see, the problem is many people
focus on cancer as a as a reduction of
cell. It's only in that cell and and a
it it when when the body has cancer uh
the there's a a number of of of
ramifications that that that um take
place throughout the body. Uh, you know,
we're we're we're producing more acidity
within ourselves. There's a lot of
responses on the part of hormones and
and and signaling cascades throughout
the body as the result of this disease.
Um, so one has to one has to treat
cancer as a as an as a systemic the
whole body has to be treated. Um, but in
in a non-toxic way. And and this is the
the the failure of the of of the of the
current treatments is that is that the
majority of treatments for cancer are
extremely toxic uh, to the body uh,
causing even greater disturbances in the
homeostatic state of the body. So, when
you look at cancer as a as a metabolic
disease, there are ways to target and
manage the disease without creating
systemic toxicity. Which is the the
standards of most of the standards of
care for cancer are extremely toxic. And
when you view the disease as a metabolic
disease, you just have to simply target
the fuels that the cells are using. And
that's primarily glucose and glutamine.
And if you can switch the body away from
these fuels, you'll have a better chance
of of of providing longer-term
management without toxicity. It's it's a
little bit more difficult than what I
led to
said here. That was strategy. Right. And
I want to discuss those now, but before
I do I want to emphasize another point
to kind of
frame the discussion around. And that
will we focus on the discussion of
cancer. And I and I want to ask you one
question before we go into the the
details.
But the point I want to make is that
it's not just cancer. Yes, 1,600 people
will die today. And I believe and I want
to
I'll just going to ask you the question
now. From you because you probably have
more experience using this new
nutritional ketosis as a clinical
intervention and treatment and
management of cancer than anyone I know
of. And I'm wondering what your guess
would be and how of those 1,600 people
who have died today, what percent would
this intervention
eliminate the cancer?
Well, you know, this is a very difficult
question. I we can't say if the
metabolic therapy will eliminate the
cancer.
In other words, the so-called cure.
Um the cure is a
I don't know, it's an arrogant kind of
thing.
We're going to cure cancer, right?
Well,
that's what Warburg wanted to do with
his Patterson Peterson wanted to do.
Yeah, well, you know, they say it
I I don't say it.
Uh what I like to say is, can we
effectively manage the disease
so that people can get on with their
lives
and and not be and and and and not be
crippled by by by the problem. Um I I
look for long-term management with a
good quality of life. You see? Now, we
don't know who's cured from cancer. The
The issue is, if you die
from old age, from something you had
cancer at say 40, and you die at 93 from
something other than cancer, you I we
would know you were cured from your
cancer. Right, right.
But we can't know that because because
cancers many cancers come as the result
of the treatments.
Some some people are so-called we go
they use this 5-year thing. If you don't
have your cancer come back in 5 years,
they call you they call you cured. But
15 years later you get a new kind of
cancer
that came as the result of the treatment
for the first cancer.
Now, and that could be from toxic
chemicals or radiation or a variety of
other things that that would be used.
So, was that person really cured of that
cancer or was it the same cancer that
came back or a new cancer that came
back? Uh it's it's very hard to say
that. So, what I like to say
is, can we manage cancer and maintain a
high quality of life for as long as we
possibly can?
I think that's a more rational view to
this, rather than saying metabolic
or ketogenic diets are going to cure
cancer. I never said that. And and other
people say ketogenic diets will cure
cancer. Now, if someone's on a ketogenic
diet for 7 years and they're not and and
their and their cancer is still there,
but it's not progressing, are they cured
or are they managed? So So, the question
is these are the kinds of concepts So, I
don't like to say that uh we we can cure
cancer. I like to say that we can manage
cancer and keep people in a in a in a
state of uh of uh of quality of life.
Okay, well, that's a fair and really
good response to my poorly worded
question. Let me reframe the question,
what I really meant to say
uh because my focus is really on
prevention. But let's and you know,
rather than go and try to plug the holes
in the diet, let's go upstream and
figure out what where the where the
problem is flooding, so we don't have
any any holes at all. So, if we were to
use nutritional ketosis, which I prefer
than ketogenic diet because of the all
the baggage of the term ketones, Yeah.
if we if we use nutritional ketosis,
effective nutritional ketosis as a
therapeutic intervention prior
to the diagnosis of of the establish of
cancer, Yes. what percentage of those
that would eventually develop a a
cancer, do you think it would be
effective? I think it's over 90%. I'm
wondering what yours are what yours are.
No, I would say I would say this the
same thing. It's It's It's between 80
and 90%. Yeah. So, um and who's to know?
Because we haven't really done any of
those experiments. We don't know. These
are pure speculative statements. But But
But what we have to recognize,
in light of what we've we've done and
others,
is that if cancer is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease and you get cancer
because of mitochondrial failure in
certain populations of cells and certain
tissues,
if you prevent your mitochondria from
entering into this dysfunctional state
and cancer is a mitochondrial metabolic
disease, the probability of getting
cancer is going to be significantly
reduced.
So, to what percent? I would say
probably 80% at at minimum of 80%. So,
cancer is probably, as I said in my
book, one of the most manageable
diseases that we know of.
Very little energy is giving into into
prevention. Most of the energy in cancer
is is for cures, finding cures and
finding new treatments. Very little
energy is spent. The federal government
spends very little energy on on on on on
prevention. Now, the problem, of course,
is people don't want many people. I
don't want to say all people, but the
people don't want
that what do you have to do to prevent
cancer? Oh, you have to therapeutically
fast for a week. Oh, I'm not going to
give me a break. I'll take I'll roll the
dice and say, let me get let me see if
I'm going to get
Right.
It it it's like, what Oh, I have to
exercise? So, I I if I So, the the the
an effective prevention is to eat less
and move more. And and you know what? To
a lot of people they don't want to do
that. Um but I have to admit, the
younger people are are are are
recognizing this and I think that uh
more and more people are becoming to
real- Once you realize what cancer is,
it's a metabolic disease, then you can
take charge of of those kinds of things.
In other words, getting cancer is not
God's will. It's not It's not the fact
that you that you have bad luck as as
some some of the scientists say, you
know, you got bad luck. You got you have
nothing do. You just got bad luck. It's
in your genes. You got bad luck.
You know, this is this is not accurate.
Um yeah, you're exposed Our environment.
Now, we have to recognize I agree with
you. Uh
Our food industry is producing massive
amounts of food that's
nutritionally deficient and uh full of
of of things that can cause systemic
inflammation contributing to the risk of
cancer. So, we're bombarded and the
foods are taste so good. They tweak our
our our love of glucose, our love of
sweets, and it makes us very you're
probably not aware of. We spray over I
think it's a billion almost a billion
pounds of glyphosate as Roundup on our
food crops that are mostly fed to
animals. Yeah.
is a potent uh potent contributor to
mitochondrial dysfunction. I just
learned that last week. Yeah, no, no.
I'm saying there's so many things in our
environment that contribute to
mitochondrial dysfunction.
And you know, that manifests itself not
only in the form of cancer. It manifests
its form in the in the form of type 2
diabetes, cardiovascular disease,
Alzheimer's disease.
You know, Alzheimer's disease is another
one of these metabolic problems. People
who have Alzheimer's disease are
hypometabolic.
You know, one of the questions at the
NCI was, how come people with
Alzheimer's disease have a lower risk to
get cancer? That was one of the
provocative questions. And the issue is
is that they have low blood sugar
levels. They are hypometabolic. It's
very hard to drive a tumor if the fuels
that the drive the tumor are are in
lower low concentrations. The question
is the bigger question is, why people
with Alzheimer's are hypometabolic? You
know, what's going on with their
metabolism that that puts them at risk
for that disease. So, you know, rather
than focusing on on the genetic variants
of a this Yeah, like all diseases, we
have some that are inherited. These are
rare genetic variants in in the
population. But you know, the majority
of these different chronic diseases are
the result of our environment, a
gene-environmental interaction. And you
know, the question is, okay, there's
nothing I can do about my genetics. I've
inherited this. I can't go about and and
retool my genetics. But I certainly can
recognize the environmental factors that
could predispose me for these kinds of
disease and say, what can I do to reduce
the impact of these negative
environmental factors? And one of these
is to, you know, keep your mitochondria
healthy. How do you do that? You burn
ketones. All right. Now, people will go
out and drink ketone drinks and they'll
go out and have a big ice cream sundae
and then swallow a bunch of ketones. I
mean, what what that's not going to
help. The You know what I'm saying,
right? This is people do these things.
So so I do ask your your view point. Not
that strategy but in addition to you
know, difference of using a therapy like
exogenous ketones or or
short chain fatty acids like
caprylic acid is might medium chain
fatty acids.
Uh
to generate but anyway, we'll discuss
that in a moment. Yeah, but I'm just
saying your body your body retains
ketones when blood sugar's especially
lower. Otherwise, you pee out the
ketones. So um you know, this is another
thing you have to cuz we've done these
studies in mice and we've seen this. So
that
you can't have your ice cream and
ketones too. No.
Yeah, you can look at it that way, too.
Yeah, that's a good thing. So so yeah, I
just want to expand a little bit. What's
That's all I want Thank you for for that
response cuz I wanted to frame that
around there. And And also mention what
motivated Describe a little more detail
what motivated me passionately about
this. I've I've been motivated I have a
strong
view on vaccines largely because I know
the damage they do and I know that I did
it to thousands of people I I take
thousands of kids that I
ignorantly contributed to. So I'm really
motivated about that. But similarly, I'm
motivated about this cancer because you
know, I didn't contribute to it. I just
somehow motivates me to emotionally the
same way and
film that the best video film I've ever
seen to illustrate it's a it's a best
selling book, too, is The Fault in Our
Stars. I don't know if you seen the
movie
The Fault in Our Stars. I've heard of it
but I haven't seen it.
Yeah, I would strongly recommend it but
I would caution you to only view that
movie with a full box of Kleenex.
Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay, well, I'll write it
down.
So and then that So that contribute you
know, reading Travis's book and watching
that they did all kind of had this
confluence that motivated me. But but
then as I started studying I realized,
as you mentioned, it's not just cancer.
It's every kind of It's
neurodegenerative disease, Alzheimer's,
Parkinson's, ALS.
And then you've got the diabetes, the
obesity, the seizure disorder for sure,
slam dunk.
Hypertension,
hypercholesterolemia. You know,
everything that we're treating with all
these drugs is
basically solvable if with a proper
nutrition intervention. So, that's what
I want to focus on the last part of this
discussion because the devil's in the
details. How do we do that? I know this
is where I think we're going to have
some disagreement because I've come to
different conclusions that you have on
how to achieve this state. Because
that's what we want. You mentioned
earlier that we have to reduce
carbohydrate to probably and let me
respond to that.
Certainly under 100 g.
But probably under 50. If by
carbohydrate I mean non-fiber
carbohydrate. I eat 150 g of
carbohydrate, 100 g of that is fiber.
So, 50 g is not non-fiber carbs. But
then you said glutamine, but I think
it's beyond glutamine and I connected
you with Ron Ross to discuss this, but I
think it's just I'm total amino acid
content. I mean, certainly glutamine is
important, but there's a threshold amino
acid level if you go above you're going
to stimulate the mTOR pathway which
works in conjunction with insulin
signaling may be more a powerful
influencer on mitochondrial function and
mitochondrial biogenesis than insulin.
So, we'll we'll talk about that. So,
I I said a mouthful, so I'll let you
respond and then we'll fine-tune. Well,
yeah, the reason I the reason I
mentioned glutamine is is because the
amide the the amide nitrogen of
glutamine
is the precursor for synthesis of
nucleotides, DNA and RNA and this kind
of thing. So, the cells need to
proliferate. Sure. Glutamine is one of
the is one of the amino acids that the
amino acid in the
nutrition. So, so that's why I I said
when you when you when you you the the
cells need the can use the glutamine.
They can get energy from it and they can
build they can proliferate from it. So,
of course glucose and glutamine is like
a supercharged system. Yeah, cuz if you
lower glutamine, you're going to lower
protein. You just have to unless you're
just taking
You're absolutely right. And and one
it's so much easier to target the
glucose through these metabolic
therapies than it is the glutamine. And
I think this is where the challenge is.
And and I have to but it's this is a
this is not an insurmountable challenge.
Oh, no. No.
It's just that we've haven't focused on
it as much as we focused on on how many
mutations a cancer cell has. If we were
to take all that knowledge base and
figure out how to do this we would be
able to solve this problem in about 5
years. I mean, it wouldn't take that
long. I mean, I hate to be I hate to be
flippant about this, but cancer is a
very solvable problem. Oh, it's
relatively easily if you if you
understand
healthy clinical nutrition. Most most
missions done. They're closed.
BC. There's a even a bigger issue. And
it's not so much
I mean, we can we can discuss the most
adequate and su-
best nutritional compositions of foods
and reducing inflammation and this kind
of thing. It's not going to happen
because I mean, we I'm certainly happy
for the people that understand and know
about this. But for the majority of
people, so we always have to look at
economics.
Um
money uh basically.
Where does it become financially
feasible to shift into these into this
realm?
And um
there's an interesting there's two ways
to deliver medicine medical care in this
country, at least two, at least the two
that I think of. Is one is
fee-for-service.
Patient goes to the physician. He's He's
offered this therapy, that therapy, this
test, that test. And that's And every
one of these costs a certain amount of
money that's added to the bill. And the
hospitals balance their budgets on this
and everything. The other is global
budget. Where a certain amount of money
is given to the hospital to care for the
patients in that hospital. Now, if you
do a really good job at caring for your
patients, you can share in the revenues
from the from the money that was given.
Incentivized problem. Right, there's an
incentive here.
Now, if you can prevent chronic diseases
like cancer, type 2 diabetes, coronary
artery disease through a dietary
metabolic shift and training physicians
and patients how to do this, you
significantly reduce the number of tests
and drugs you need to handle for those
patients. Therefore, the caregivers
themselves will financially benefit from
this strategy versus fee for service in
those two ways. So, this now becomes
economically feasible to use metabolic
therapies for treating these various
chronic diseases. Now, this can happen
in certain states and in certain
situations. The question is, what is the
the incentive, of course, is that the
physicians and caregivers
are incentivized to use this kind of a
therapy because it's keeping their
patients healthy out of the hospital and
not having all these procedures that are
needless and and very and very costly.
We can save the nation billions and
billions of dollars using the metabolic
therapy.
The health care budget is 3 trillion. We
can save them billions, trillions. We we
cannot continue to go down this path
because it's going to the entire
country's ability to to to function in
the world. We can't be spending 50% of
our this country.
I know because of the the the the the
the the co- the conflict of interest and
the corruption between industry
basically a fascist governmental system.
So, but the the the there is a work
around. That's why I'm so excited
because there are people who understand
the truth like you. There are large
mouthpieces like myself who have reached
to millions, literally tens of millions
of individuals that can
Once they can you can offer them this
program, it works, their whole life
changes, their neighbor, their friends,
their relative want to know what did you
do? And they are starting to spread it
from ground level up and then you change
it from the bottom up. You don't change
it from the top down. No, you're
absolutely right. It can't be changed
from the top down because the interests
in the top are not the same as the
interests at the bottom.
It'll never happen. That's why that's
why we we we you know, I'm passionate
about GMO labeling but do you think do
you think we're going to try to do that
with the federal government when
Monsanto controls the almost the entire
federal government and departments that
it is related to this? You know, it's
impossible. They they locked it up. So
you've got to do a ground swell work
around. Yeah, and I agree and I but I
think that you're absolutely right and I
think I think these kinds of approaches
are not so terribly difficult or so or
so mind-boggling. Um you know, changing
your shifting your your blood sugar. Now
we published the paper
on the glucose ketone index calculator
in in open access journal
which can be used for every person in
any whether you're a healthy athlete or
whether you're a cancer patient or
diabetic patient, you can use the
glucose ketone index calculator to
assess the health vitality of your
mitochondria.
When you have a glucose in ratio of 1.0
or below, you know your mitochondria are
in a very healthy zone. So everybody can
That's a really hard index to go to and
for those you know, just to expand on
that, it's it's glucose to to ketone
ratio and you ketones by blood not by
urine and and glucose in millimoles not
in milligram per deciliter. So you have
to do something. You could there's a
formula I'm sure but there's a chart
that you can go online that you can see
with your numbers and convert them.
Well, in our get to a one and below. I
mean that I can easily get to two
certainly between two and three under
five for sure but under one is really
really hard unless you're totally
fasting which I don't think that You
don't you don't have to be in the one
zone for very long. Yeah, I mean if
you're a cancer patient, you try to hit
that zone as much as possible. I I'll
talk about that because it's different
for cancer patients than it is for
healthy people. Healthy people can get
down. I've had I've had one of my
students got down to 0.3.
Wow. Yeah, but I I you know, and and my
colleague Dom D'Agostino, he he was able
to get down in that zone, too. Wow,
you stay there for a long period cuz you
have to be fasting with for a number of
days. Is that like a water fast? Did you
do that? Yeah, you do a water fast for
about three or four days, and then you
can take some ketones. Sure. And and you
can get your blood sugars way down. The
the Because it's only a Oh, it's only a
short time. You cannot do that long
term.
Well, I've had
I know some cancer patients who are not
taking any standard of care, no
radiation, no chemo, because all that
stuff elevates it's very hard to get a
low index when your body is in a state
of of of anxiety.
Um there's a stress there's a stress
issue that create that prevents the
index from going as low, and it happens
more in cancer patients than it does in
people who don't have cancer. So,
there's some anxiety. So, cancer
patients really have to work hard to get
their their their into that zone, into
that ratio. But, I've seen it happen so
many times in healthy patients after
healthy people, not patients. Um it's
not But, you're right about how long can
you stay in the zone?
And you don't I mean, to prevent cancer,
you don't have to stay there but for
maybe four or five days, you know, every
every six months or something like this.
But, it's just a guide. It helps It
helps individuals Well, that's that's
one strategy. I
my
my viewpoint or philosophical impression
is that it may be better to take an
alternative approach, rather than to go
to an extreme, which is really
difficult. I mean, you have to be water
fasting and use almost exogenous ketones
to get to those levels. Cuz normally, if
you're you know, the calorie restriction
will work, but it's specifically if you
can limit the carbohydrate non-fiber
carbohydrate below 50 g,
and your protein to below
uh 1 g per kilogram of lean body mass,
which is pretty low. I'm 175
Actually, I'm 170 lbs now
or a little bit less. And that
translates to about 70 g of protein. And
most people are taking a lot more than
that. Oh, sure. Sure. And we And we also
found that it's very individual. Um some
people can get into these zones very
quickly and very easily. Other people
really struggle. So So and they And you
know, it's It all it is all it is is is
is a biomarker gauge. Uh we we've shown
we've done we've done some very
interesting um linear regression
analysis on on on two on on
survivability of of mice with cancer
using the GKI as the independent
variable. It's glucose ketone index. And
there's definitely a statistical
relationship how low you keep your GKI
and how long you can survive with a with
a very aggressive cancer. So So clearly,
it's not the It's just one biomarker
system that allows individuals to help
battle their own cancer. Okay? As I
said, if you combine that with a certain
drugs that work together with the system
uh or certain nutrients that we Don't
forget this is an emerging field.
There's so much more we need to know as
how to tweak this system so that we can
obtain maximal metabolic efficiency in
our body while battling the disease.
These are These are biomarkers that
allow the individual to assess where
they are, where they need to go, or
where they might think they need to go.
See, without that a lot of it's
speculation. We don't We don't really
know why why this diet or that diet
helped or this nutritional situation was
more effective on one person than the
other. We're simply trying to get
biomarkers to allow us to know how we
can better assess why some people
respond better than others. So So that's
all That's all it is. And we're trying
to
link those to the together.
talk about that a little bit because I
What I didn't like to to mention earlier
is I'm so passionate about this. I I am
writing my next book, which is called
Why You get sick and how to fix it, the
metabolic treatment of disease. And what
I learned from putting this material
together so far, it's still just an
outline stage, but I hope to have it out
this year, later this year, is that
there's one you need a powerful
online software analytical tool to do a
very detailed nutritional analysis of
what you're eating, otherwise you're
clueless. You can't You can't monitor
and change things unless you know what
you're what you're dealing with. Then
secondly, you need a fasting glucose
meter. You There's no way around this.
You've got to know what your fasting
blood sugar is. And probably even take
it twice a day before you go to bed, so
you know what your sugar is before you
sleep and what it is when you wake up.
And then it you want to get it to below
70. You want a fasting blood sugar like
in the 60s or
is where you want it. Yes. And well, the
the thing is to to is is is that during
the course of a day can fluctuate, as
you know. We call it the dawn effect.
When you wake up in the morning, the
blood sugar is is much higher than it
what than it is when later in the
afternoon, things like
I I think I figured it out.
Gluconeogenesis. You're not getting
enough protein. You're If especially if
you're water fasting, you're you you
have to have amino acids. Your body
catabolizes lean muscle tissue,
generates amino acids, and in the
process those excess ones get shuttled
to the liver, generate the extra
glucose. And you can spike your glucose
well above 100, even though you haven't
You haven't had maybe 10 g of of of
glucose or carbohydrates. No, no, you're
right.
Well, see, this is one of the reason we
developed the GKI index because so many
of the the glucose, as you just
mentioned, they spike. You can't believe
it. You get into a This person got into
an argument with the neighbor, the blood
sugar went up to 160. I mean, I can't
say. They get all freaked out. They they
they start to panic. And if you you
divide it by the by the ketones, it
becomes much less of a swing. The
ketones more or less buffer these swings
in glucose. So, um still change it by
increasing almost I would venture to say
that almost all those cases are due to
their not person is not eating enough
protein. And they got
They got to measure their protein
because you don't want too much. No.
not Go go liberal, but they're probably
get getting 20% less than they need or
maybe even less, 30 40% less. Yeah,
well, that's that certainly could be
true and and and and we don't know until
we start doing these kinds of
physiological measurements on larger
numbers of people under different
conditions
uh using these indexes and that that we
will be able to precisely define the My
personal experience though because I I
mine was 70 and I just experimented and
went down to 50 g, especially with a
little weight training. Bad. Uh my my
blood sugar went up to like 120. Oh,
yeah. Oh, yeah.
And then the very next day, I increased
my calories by 300 calories, 400
calories, and increased my protein by 20
g to 70 g. It was 65. Yeah. Yeah, no no
you these are these are very important
issues and I think I think as as all of
us
a lot of us don't understand how our
bodies work or or our own physiology.
Sure. So, what we're talking about here
is a is a a personal understanding of
your of your body and how it responds to
these. And and you know, most people
don't don't even discuss this. Don't
very know very little about it.
No.
I couldn't agree more wholeheartedly
with you and that includes
many if not most. My guess is the vast
majority of health care natural health
care professionals who are advocating
embracing this concept. They don't
understand the protein component. They
haven't integrated that to the equation
and that's going to be one of the
central crux and
and thesis of the book to help people
understand actually go through the
biochemical pathways of mTOR and all the
other
pathways that contribute to it so they
can understand and paint a clear picture
like you so eloquently did with your
research, compiled it so brilliantly,
and provided the entire race with the
most powerful illustration to refute the
ignorance of the cancer therapy of the
the genetic theory of cancer.
Yeah, well, this is the first step the
first step.
Second step is to
the metabolic movement the movement
that's
I am I can assure you I'm committed
beyond 100% to to making sure this thing
happens. I mean it's the highest
priority and what everything I'm going
to do right now. So to teach these
principles because it is core to
everything and it and it's just bounces
off brick walls at what what I almost
everything that's being taught partially
because of Atkins I think cuz you know
he he was he had an interesting idea but
he absolutely didn't understand this
stuff. He was clueless
about the dangers of excess protein or
even the quality of the food. All he
thought was low carbs are are useful.
Yeah, it's useful sometimes but a lot of
times if you don't do it right you're
going to cause more good than problem
than help than
more damage than good. Yes. Well, and
the other thing the other thing too is
they when you talk about ketogenic diets
they're not all the same. And and the
ratios of the different fats to the
proteins to the carbohydrates are
extremely important in how and how this
actually works within your body. It's
not just a generic
factor.
And it's probably individualized. So you
have to customize yourself and that's
why you've got to do testing. Yes, you
can do ketone testing. There's That's a
ketone testing blood, urine, and breath.
We don't recommend urine for reasons
that we don't have the time to discuss
now. You can do the breath which is
pretty cool but the blood is the best.
It's a little bit expensive. You get
your sticks on eBay if you want to
accept the price. But it's so you don't
test as much as glucose. Glucose are 40
cents a strip 50 cents a strip.
Yeah. Yes, you're right. You're
absolutely right.
not to test it every day. Yeah. Well,
that's the whole thing. I I think you
know once people realize this those
ketone strips should eventually become
the same price as the glucose strip. I
should hope so but I'm not
too hopeful and I'm not sure that it's
necessary because if you if you're my
guess is and you have cups comments if
you're if you're stabilizing at 65 or
lower on your glucose, you're going to
have low ketones.
It's like really hard to have high
low I mean not low ketones, high
ketones. It's really hard to have low
ketones with a low blood sugar. Well,
actually
Or is it? Maybe I Maybe I'm wrong. This
is This is
The It's not clear whether they have
They have low glucose levels, but it's
not clear that they have high ketone
levels.
So
Yeah, but they have low glucose for a
metabolic reason, not because
nutritional intervention. No, no, no.
That's true.
nutritional intervention, you have low
glucose and and
the right amount of protein, the
Goldilocks version, not too much, not
too little, Yes. then you're in a
therapeutic window and you And my guess
is to actually have some short and
medium medium chain at least medium
chain triglycerides. I I like MCT oil
and coconut oil to sort of fuel the fire
because they convert to ketones so much
easier. Yes. Yes. No, you're absolutely
right. And it's an individual and it has
to be managed that way. But it's the
awareness of this is very important for
people. Yeah, that's what That's what
I'm absolutely committed to do. So, you
know, you're a resource and you really
have paved the way and I and I just am
really so appreciative for all the
pioneering work you've done and really
taking a lot of flat. I mean, you you
just painted a huge arrow or target on
your back and I'm sure you got a lot of
arrows in there because what you were
what you were promoting did not sync
with what everyone else teach out. Just
you and Peterson were out there. There
were hardly anyone else. I mean, you had
Cole, one of his great
Peterson's grad students, but not many
other people were doing this. Well, you
know,
in my lectures to I think the physician
groups are the most responsive to this.
Those individuals that must deal with
patients on a day-to-day basis and
knowing what they've been confronting
for all these years and then there's an
alternative which makes a lot of sense
to a lot of people. They wish they could
do this more. They are the physicians in
the in the trenches who deal with cancer
patients are the ones many of the ones
that that seem to be most responsive.
The the the guys who who get big grants
uh from the NCI and and to study gene
sequencing and these these guys are less
responsive to this as you would could
quite well imagine. But um you know,
this will change.
Um uh it has to change because because
this is the path which will make the
biggest difference to people's lives and
eventually manage the disease. It's just
how how how how how how fast are we
going to get to that to that? And I
think cancer can be managed very
That's a good question. You've been
doing this for 15 years now, right? 15
years or maybe 16, I don't know. I
thought thought you started in '99.
Yeah, well we've been doing biochemistry
of cancer for a long time, lipids and
things like this, but it was basic
science. It wasn't linked with
translational.
But but for 16 years, so what is your
impression from your perspective on the
shifts that have occurred over the 16
years? Give us your view. Well, now for
the first time we're getting uh
initiating clinical trials on ketogenic
diets. But it's like it's we're
stumbling. The
You know, people say, "Oh, we need a big
clinical trial to do this." And right
now, because of the individual
variations and so many uh loose ends
that we're not really sure of, I'm not
in favor of taking a hundred two hundred
people and putting them on on a generic
ketogenic diet to see what happens. No,
we have to find a protocol first. Yeah,
we have to get the biomarkers set. We
have to we have to define what are the
biomarkers we want to use to assess
therapeutic efficacy. And this is still
been debated, and you and I have just
discussed this. You know, what are the
best biomarkers to assess therapeutic
efficacy? Uh are the patients achieving
these zones? Are these people uh
entering or not entering the zone? What
are the What are the limitations? What
are the compliance issues? How do you
select patients that are going to be
compliant? There's so many different
issues that we need to do to really fair
This is at the very beginning of a new
form of treatment, and people need to uh
vet all the variables so that we can
then do a trial where we have control
for all of the things we think are going
to be the most important for assessing
therapeutic efficacy and then launch
forward. It's not like a drug. You can't
do it's very hard to do double-blind
crossover studies with with these kinds
of therapies. So the the pharmaceutical
industry has established the procedures
that all other therapies must adhere to.
But when you're doing these kinds of
therapies, you got to be very careful
because somebody's going to know whether
or not they're getting a a fat diet or a
not a non-fat diet. How do you do
double-blind crossovers? I mean, all of
these kinds of things need to be
discussed and launched. Now, we're
stumbling around with a little with a
few with a few clinical trials, which is
good. So this that's happening that
never happened before. There's a there's
strong scientific basis for this if
people really understand the
biochemistry of what's going on. And
eventually more and more people will
come online and it's going to be a move.
It's gradually going to take place and
then there's going to be anecdotal
reports all over the place about people
who managed their disease using
metabolic therapy and avoided toxic
treatments. So it's going to take time,
but I but it certainly will happen. I
have no doubt in my mind that it will
happen. All right. With that the
perspective, let me give you my
frame or picture with that what
bit of information I need my
perspective. I've been
passionate about technology and
nutrition and health for almost 50
years. I took my first programming class
class Fortran and Cobol 1968.
And then I got my first computer in '85.
It was only would have had it sooner
except I was in medical school and
residency training program. So that's
when I finished.
And then I got online in 1995
about 2 years before I started my
website.
But I can tell you from my perspective
now, which is I've been online uh
for 20 years. 20 actually 21 years now.
Uh so cuz I got on in '95. And
this is everyone knows how pervasive,
how enormously encompassing,
intertwining the internet is. Our life
will never be the the same again.
And if you can just imagine that prior
to 1995 how your life was compared to
what it is now. I mean, it's the
internet.
Well, and it's the web. It's the web /
America's internet started in 1968
with DARPA. But, I think it's the same
situation I had the same feeling that I
did in '95 that we are on the threshold
of an explosion of clinical intervention
that's going to change the history of
medicine.
Literally will change history of
medicine. And we don't have time to go
into the details now what that is.
That's why I'm writing a book. I If you
My word and my commitment, I'm going to
have the protocol out and hopefully you
can use it as a part of a the process as
we start getting this feedback is
anecdotal feedback of all these success
stories so that we can design the
clinical studies that will prove it and
rapidly accelerate the adoption of this.
So, literally those 1,600 people don't
have to die every day.
Yeah, I agree.
needless needless pain and suffering.
And and if you want,
you know, Fault in Our Stars, really a
phenomenal movie movie that will just
drive that home on steroids. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. That's very important.
Yeah, so you got to know why and you
once you get the emotions behind it, you
get going and you have a reason to do
this cuz I There's no doubt I've
actually applied this myself, you know,
I've and I know it works. I know and
I've refined the protocol. So, I'm not
talking out of my butt. I'm talking
about practical anecdotal observations
and in personal, you know, in my
knowledge of 30 years of of of of health
and medicine and in applying and
integrating developing a protocol that
works using very simple foods and
targeting using biomarkers like the
daily fastings to target and guide your
therapy and customize it. So, I'm
beyond excited about this cuz I think
it's the most important thing I'll ever
do in my life clinically.
Is to contribute to this field and I'm
so grateful for your you know, your part
in contributing to the process of
opening up our eyes to this truth.
Well, thank you.
Yeah, it's a great work. So, anything
else you want to close? I kind of like
ranted for a while so I'll
let you summarize and give your
recommendation. No, I think you know, I
think um
you we've covered a lot of bases and you
know, we can talk more about this but I
think we covered most of the things and
and I know I've had some people contact
me who have watched your programs
and have implemented some of these
things. Um
you know, Gordon Emerson I think is one
of the one one of the guys and he's he's
his has remarkable
uh insight on on on this whole process
and he's he he and his wife have have
experienced um health health benefits
from from some of these things. Again,
these are anecdotal reports.
You know, my our goal is to write up uh
peer-reviewed publications on this and
this is what I do and I think the more
these get out into the literature, the
more things will change. Well, one of
the things I was negligent on it in
mentioning your enormously valuable
contribution to the literature which is
a book. You really it's a really
textbook so it's kind of pricey. It's
that's over $100 I think.
Or maybe $80 on Kindle. But it's the I I
you know the title is Cancer Metabolism
is it? Cancer is a Metabolic Disease.
Cancer is a Metabolic Disease. So, great
book is available on Amazon and if you
really want to dig dig dig deep into the
details you can. We're going to put a
link that summarizes most of that uh
paper that you wrote that is open source
that's available online PDF. So,
uh that really good paper and it you
know, it's I think it's maybe 5 10 pages
and it goes really highlights this
highlights the details from your book.
So, Yeah. It's just cuz this is
we can we literally I mean
but with my passion and your knowledge
we could talk about this for 10 hours
and not exhaust the topic. There's just
so much to discuss. I mean there really
is. Yeah.
So many different tangents we can take
and everything but but you know we you
know people have a limited tolerance for
this so you know so don't get
discouraged. I'm writing all this stuff
up and putting it all together in this
very
easy to understand implement pro program
so you know it'll be available later
this year. No that's good. Okay. All
right. Well thank you so much. Thank
you.
You know what? I'm hopefully we've
inspired more people to seriously
consider cuz you know
I didn't get it last time. You know I
mean I and I'm you know this is my this
is my life's work and I still the light
bulb didn't go up until I read Travis's
book. I mean it was just like bang bang
bang. It's like someone hit me in the
head with a baseball bat and I finally
got it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well I think
it's it's it's happening to a more and
more people come to this realization and
that's you're absolutely right. This is
when things will really start changing.
As I said this is the tipping point. It
is George Dr. George Yu. He's been
behind this and
you know
Joe Maroon
Dr. Joe Maroon in Pittsburgh. There's a
lot of physicians that are coming on
board. So I I I think things are going
to start changing for the best and for
the success of people. Got it.
Too many people are dying needlessly
that don't have to. I mean it's
just crazy. Just out of ignorance and we
we
the knowledge exists.
The information is there. It's just a
matter of applying it. So.
And there's no doubt in my mind that
this this is effective. So.
Okay. Onward
Hey.